hey guys we got sam nelson here from
outreach he's a
sales legend um for me as an sdr huge
role model been looking at his content
forever and
for many others out there like both with
his content but also outreach as an
organization have been kind of the
the new standard for how a lot of
companies are reaching out so stoked to
have them on
and and talking about how to sell more
with empathy and
balancing that with automation so thanks
for being here sam
right on happy to be here uh before we
get started
i mean obviously outreach is kind of the
big piece of your career but can you
give everybody just a little background
as to
kind of who you are in the sales world
um
yeah so actually right before i joined
outreach
i started a startup with my buddy in
college and
um it didn't become the billion dollar
company that we hoped
he left and he actually he's over a y
combinator now i don't know if you've
heard of that
it's an early stage vc vc firm he's
working there and then
i decided hey one thing you learn if you
ever try to start a business on your own
is that creating something from nothing
on the sales side is extremely valuable
and so i decided
what i wanted to do next in my career
was i wanted to learn
how to do cold outbound prospecting i
thought it was the most outside of
programming i guess i thought that's
going to be like the most
valuable skill in the entrepreneurial
world and so
i heard of outreach and i was like oh my
gosh like
outreach not only can i do cold outbound
like that hardest part of the sales
cycle but i could work at a company
that is making a tool that's hoping to
change cold outbound
like i could be like selling people on
doing better cold outbound and doing
cold outbound i was like
i could be like a meta cold outbound
person
it was like a dream come true and so
um i started outreach did really well i
was a
top performer as an sdr and then i was
an sdr manager and then i managed sdr
managers and
i'm at this point um i spent i spent
quite a bit of my time consulting
and so that's been my the last
five years i guess in a nutshell and how
i ended up where i am right now
awesome man and that's something that
like i mean i know so many
organizations like sales culture is
pretty tight-knit and the linkedin
community has made that easier and
so many different teams i know are
following some patterns you've developed
or
at least that you've released out to the
public as far as like how to build a
great list and how to set up your
sequences with a tool like outreach and
get the most out of that tool
yeah so when you started with outreach
like how
how early was it like did you build all
those processes out yourself or is that
a lot of things that you learned from
being at outreach
um when i was first when i first started
out
that i tell new sdrs this like i
was pretty obedient to my manager
like there were like i had just come
from a startup right i was running my
own show and so i was used to calling my
own shots
so like it was actually like kind of
awkward for me to have a boss after that
even though i was like pretty young
but um i just decided hey like i
disagree with a lot of stuff but i'm
just gonna do exactly what my manager
says
and follow all of the exact processes
and it turned out
that most of the time i was wrong as for
starting out
turned out that they just like had some
information i didn't have it also turned
out that i was right about some things
too but
um i was pretty
i mean i was pretty strict to the rules
when i first started out and i think
that was really valuable for me
a lot of people if you ultimately want
to be creative and do new things
it's very important to master the core
principles first
like picasso says you want to
learn the rules like a professional so
you can break them like an artist
in sales development things are always
changing and there's always new things
that you can do
and it's there's nuance for every
company but learn the rules
first before you start trying to go to
wacky
totally yeah so this is one piece of
advice and especially sales people i
think struggle with that sometimes
because there's like
everybody almost wants to be that lone
wolf or that guy that like goes out and
is just the most charismatic and can do
it his own way and but there is a
process that we can follow to be
streamlined
um and so that's kind of why i created
this actually it was like there's
this background behind what a sales
person's supposed to be versus what a
salesperson really is and
there's all these stereotypes about wolf
of wall street or like the old insurance
brokers or used car salesmans and things
like that and
in the modern sales world i feel like
empathy has become a big focus
on like how do you empathize more with
your prospects how do you care more
about the value you're providing
um and so before we get into the
technical pieces i'm just wondering
where do you think empathy plays the
biggest role in sales
it's interesting i think just based on
what i've heard from some other people i
think maybe i look at empathy different
than some others
and um for me i came to outreach
and within a couple of weeks i was
performing
just like the top performers and that
was true with other people in my class
and the reason for that is we were using
outreach outreach could get a lot of
this
manual work done for us beforehand right
or things that we didn't have to think
about and so it allowed people to do
really well even if they hadn't been in
sales before
even if they were new like people that
wanted to work hard could pretty much be
successful
and i used my own product and so like i
genuinely had like this personal um
real love for the product and so
if you really really love what you're
promoting
empathy drives boldness some people see
them as maybe they're on the opposite
side of the spectrum like
are we being um are we doing
are we being really pushy or are we like
being really soft and maybe the people
that are soft have empathy
and the people that are really pushing
for the meeting don't
but that's not how it works for me
at all like for me it's like okay
i'm calling you you don't realize this
right now
they don't realize it but outreach is
they have a huge
gap that they don't see that could be
solved by outreach
they don't see it and i do and so i take
it really seriously when i'm on the
phone with someone
i know that i can make a huge difference
for them and so i'm very bold
and very direct because i know that it
will make a huge difference for
them it's because i care about them that
i'm bold
like if you if you have a family member
that has coveted and you have a cure
you're not going to say oh well maybe if
you maybe if you want to get back to me
i'd sure love it thanks
you'd be like no listen you need to take
a meeting tomorrow we need to talk about
this because this is a big deal
and if you are really sincere about that
if you actually love the product it'll
come off really natural
and that was and that's the only way i
know how to sell
i think that's an extremely important
thing for the modern sales person to
know
is like when like things like bravado
and what sahil is doing with like trying
to reframe what a salesperson looks like
it's like
we're not trying to say that you don't
be confident like you can't go into a
cold call or a cold email or anything
and just be like
completely soft like there's a way to
care about the problem and care about
the value you present but confidently
care about it and be like look i'm
presenting you with answers to your
problems and i want to help you
but the first thing is getting the right
people right because like
if you're going to be super confident
about it part of what's going to build
that confidence is knowing you're
talking to someone who has the problems
that you're solving for
so like what are some of the tactics or
tools you're using to make sure you get
that right person on the phone and that
you're reaching out to those right
people
yeah it depends i'm trying to figure out
if i should should i talk
from the perspective of a manager or
from a rep
either way um i've kind of shifted the
approach of this to be more focused on
like the the stage of the sales process
and how to go through it um
but i think both are valuable like let's
start maybe with a rep like from an
sdr's perspective like how do they find
the right person
okay so you need to figure out who can
become an immediate opportunity and if
you're a new rep
you don't know that so what you need to
do is you need to ask other account
executives and
ask other sdrs and what i do is i made
an excel spreadsheet
and i just bucketed it by departments we
sell into
the sdr org we sell into the closer org
we sell into sales ops
and marketing okay and so
i'll just make a hierarchical list of
every one i would find of the different
titles that i would find in there
rank them from most to least important
and then go around to other people who
would know
and figure out which ones can become
immediate opportunities and which ones
can't like there's a big difference in
the appropriate way to approach someone
who can become an immediate opportunity
and someone who can maybe help you and
can't totally get there
and if you ask enough people you'll find
that you'll come to a pretty
consistent idea of who can become an
immediate opportunity
and for us it's manager plus they're
managing people
um they can usually be an entry point
for us
and so this is a question that i haven't
asked enough but i think
because you've been both the sdr hat and
worked your way up into a managerial
role you might have a good answer for it
is
organizations often struggle to either
open it up to the
sdrs and basically say like hey we're
gonna sort you by territory or vertical
or whatever it is but like go
find your leads and do it yourself
versus having
pre-assigned lists that's like hey we
built this list out for you
now go get em what are your thoughts on
the pre-assigned list versus letting a
rep have the
the power themselves now there's i mean
the way that people
set it up is like snowflakes like
they're all kind of different
i am very much of the school of
assigning a list of accounts
and um the sdr will look into that
account find the right people that are
high priority find some people who are
lower priority and
um reach out to them with sequences
appropriately
nice i like that a lot because it gives
that little bit of ownership and
training of like knowing how to research
and find the right people but you're
giving them guidance and direction of
like these are the type of accounts that
will benefit
from yeah and then you're more likely to
and you avoid the problem of two people
going after the same account which if
you're in sales you know that
that can cause some pretty explosive
issues it's the absolute worst
um so kind of pivoting into the outreach
side of things right so like
now that you have that list of accounts
and you're able to kind of find the
right people to go after
and prioritize them based on title and
what they can do for you in the sales
process
now you're going to actually go to to
reach out there's like individual
personalized outreach and then there's
like automated outreach
and obviously your tool with outreach.io
supports automation and streamlining of
the workflow
and so i'm wondering how do you balance
efficiency with like streamlining that
workflow
versus still being able to show empathy
and care for these prospects and make
sure that you are having that same level
of personalization too
um yeah so it's about doing
personalization in the right places
there are certain places where
personalization will have a huge return
on investment
and there are some places where it won't
have a very big return on investment
at all right it can even have a negative
return on investment one place where it
has a huge return on investment
is in the first line of that first email
like when your prospects are looking at
the email
they're going to see the subject and
they're going to see the first line of
that email
and so right there that is a very good
place to put in personalization
and i don't honestly like i don't know
why personalization
causes people to respond so much
necessarily i mean
in my head it seems like oh well like if
we
told them like what we do it would be
better because that's really what we're
ultimately trying to solve one
for every reason it's personalization
right so the first line of the first
email makes a huge difference and
whatever
you can do that's really cool is you can
templatize the rest i mean
you can a b test it yourself usually
people find that personalizing the
entire email
first personalizing the first sentence
doesn't cause
a difference so save 80 percent of your
time right there
and then the other thing that outreach
can do is it can give that
personalized first email more chances to
be seen like if someone doesn't see it
you can send a follow-up email that
draws attention to that email again
and the other thing outreach can do is
when you're calling it can save that
first email right there and so
every time you call somebody you can
reference
the research that you did to personalize
that first line
and so you can the great thing about
outreach is that
it creates a system for a lot of the
other work
um or it automates a lot of the
non-sales activity so you can be
spending all of your time
doing that personalization and using
that personalization
and not necessarily the admin work
associated with
doing it in the first place so
essentially it frees up so much time
that like a rep can focus on the
research of the account
and like the maybe the research or the
contact enough to to do that
personalization in the right areas but
then it streamlines everything else so
that you can focus that time on the
research and be able to like
feel okay that you can still hit your
volumes and the rest of your outreach
because all those other like admin tasks
and other pieces are streamlined
yeah yeah it eliminates a lot of
non-sales activity
cool and and so the other question i was
going to have for you and this
um it's like let's say you go into your
first call with somebody or your first
email with somebody
like what what's generally your approach
to that first email or that first call
like what part
like like what do you want to focus on
to like start the conversation with
somebody
no it's different for calls and emails
um
but for email i kind of talked about
that i'll talk about call
um why approach calls is also different
than a lot of other people
um the way i approach calls is i ask for
the meeting pretty soon pretty pretty
fast
i explained really briefly what we do
and i said i would love to
chat with you um
tomorrow morning and show you more about
it whatever
and the reason i do that is not because
i'm expecting them to say oh sure yeah
you told me that one sentence let's go
and have a 30-minute meeting
the reason for that is i expect them to
reject me they will reject me with the
reason that they don't want to take the
meeting maybe it's a gap of information
maybe they're using a competitor
maybe they don't have the authority
whatever it is
but by asking for the meeting really
early you can get that really important
piece of information early on in the
cold call
and cold call second counts and so if
you can know the difference between
hey i'm talking about a competitive
situation versus
i don't know enough about the product
versus i don't have the power if you can
figure that out right away
all of a sudden you it tran it changes
the whole rest of the phone call
so i close really early not because i'm
expecting to get the meeting based on
nothing
but because the rejection usually gives
me information to actually address the
problem that stands between them in the
meeting
so essentially the goal going into it is
like i'm trying to get context as
quickly as possible
and then leverage that context to take
guide the conversation accordingly
afterwards
yes but here's what's weird and here's
what's counter-intuitive
it's the most efficient way to get that
context
this is straight up ask for the meeting
they'll tell you
if they don't want to take it why is
that something someone taught you or did
you just kind of figure that out on your
own
um i that's not original to me
i've i learned that from
i don't know it's been around i feel
like
we learned so many things from so many
places it's hard to track sometimes
um cool man uh i mean this has already
been
super insightful and and obviously i
would love to talk to you for an hour if
i could but i want to be
respectful of your time too and i think
that there's enough here for people to
get a lot out of it
um before wrapping up though i always
like to give an opportunity for a plug
because
i've gotten so much value from your
content i know others on my team and
other companies have too
um if you want to talk about anything
you're working on currently
maybe outside of outreach or um anywhere
you want to send people to
to see more from sam nelson yeah come
follow me on linkedin
i do weekly webinars on thursdays at 11
and they're usually really good so
highly recommend you come